The Moon is the Earth’s only natural satellite. A natural satellite is a space body that orbits a planet, a planet like object or an asteroid.
The Moon is the fifth largest moon in the Solar System. Learn more about the other moons in the Solar System.
The average distance from the Moon to the Earth is 384403 kilometers (238857 miles).
The Moon orbits the Earth every 27.3 days.
Mons Huygens is the tallest mountain on the Moon, it is 4700 meters tall, just over half the height of Mt Everest (8848m).
The Moon rotates on its axis in around the same length of time it takes to orbit the Earth. This means that from Earth we only ever see around 60% of its surface (50% at any one time).
The side that we can see from Earth is called the near side while the other side is called the far side (it is sometimes called the dark side despite the fact that it illuminated by the Sun just as much as the near side).
The effect of gravity is only about one fifth (17%) as strong on the surface of the Moon compared to the strength of gravity on the surface of the Earth.
The Soviet Union’s Luna program featured the first successful landing of an unmanned spacecraft on the surface of the Moon in 1966.
The USA’s NASA Apollo 11 mission in 1969 was the first manned Moon landing.
The first person to set foot on the Moon was Neil Armstrong.
The far side of the Moon looks quite different due to its lack of Maria (ancient pools of solidified lava).
The surface of the Moon features a huge number of impact craters from comets and asteroids that have collided with the surface over time. Because the Moon lacks an atmosphere or weather these craters remain well preserved.
Although research is continuing, most scientists agree that the Moon features small amounts of water.
The Moon is very hot during the day but very cold at night. The average surface temperature of the Moon is 107 degrees Celsius during the day and -153 degrees Celsius at night.
The Earth’s tides are largely caused by the gravitational pull of the Moon.
The phases of the Moon are: New Moon, Crescent, First Quarter, Waxing Gibbous, Full Moon, Waning Gibbous, Last Quarter, Crescent, New Moon….
A lunar eclipse occurs when the Earth is between the Sun and the Moon.
At 3,475 km in diameter, the Moon is much smaller than the major moons of Jupiter and Saturn. Earth is about 80 times the volume than the Moon, but both are about the same age. A prevailing theory is that the Moon was once part of the Earth, and was formed from a chunk that broke away due to a huge object colliding with Earth when it was relatively young.
The Apollo missions brought back 2196 rock samples weighing 382 kg in total.
From Earth, only 59% of the moon is visible.
The volume of Earth’s moon is the same as the volume of the Pacific Ocean.
The gravitational force of the moon in relation to Earth slows Earth’s rotation by about 1.5 milliseconds per century and raises the moon into higher orbit by about 3.8 centimeters or 1.5 inches per year.
In approximately 15 billion years, the moon and Earth’s gravitational pulls on each other would stabilize. But in approximately 7 billion years, the sun will have become a red giant star, completely engulfing and incinerating the moon and Earth.
Strange colored lights have sometimes been seen briefly on the moon’s surface. Scientists believe these lights are made by gases that leak from deep inside the moon.
Although a full moon seems bright, it is actually reflecting just 7% of the sun’s rays.
There are three kinds of moon rocks: basalt (dark), anorthosite (light), and breccia (a mixture of several rocks). These types of rocks are also found on Earth.
The moon has Wi-Fi. It comes all the way from Earth, beamed by 4 infrared telescopes.
Cell phones today are 400 times more powerful than the computer that helped guide humans to the moon
Apollo 11 had only 20 seconds of fuel left when they landed on the moon.
Apollo 15 was the first mission to use a lunar rover. The top speed that was ever recorded in this 4-wheeled land vehicle was 10.56 miles per hour.
When Alan Sheppard was on the moon, he hit a golf ball and drove it 2,400 feet, nearly one half a mile.
The moon has no global magnetic field.
The temperature on the Moon varies from super hot to super cold! When the Sun hits its surface, temperatures can reach a scorching 127°C. But when the Sun ‘goes down’, temperatures can plummet to around -153°C.
Scientists aren’t entirely sure how the Moon formed. A popular theory is that a Mars-sized rock, named Theia, crashed into Earth around 4.5 billion years ago. The debris from the
collision clumped together to make what is now… Our Moon!
Moonquakes, which originate several miles below the moon’s surface, may be a result of Earth’s gravitational pull. Engineers say these quakes could become a factor if lunar bases are ever built on the moon.[
Approximately 49 moons could fit into Earth.
The entire surface of the moon is covered in a layer of crushed and powdered rocks called regolith (from the Greek rhegos = blanket + lithos = rock). The dust is a result of millions of years of bombardment from space by tiny micrometeorites.
A lunar eclipse, when Earth passes between the sun and the moon, lasts longer than a solar eclipse because Earth’s shadow is so much larger
Because the surface of the moon has no wind or water, an astronaut’s footprint could last for millions of years.
The oldest known map of the moon, about 5,000 years old, was found carved into a rock in a prehistoric tomb at Knowth, County Meath, in Ireland. Before this was discovered, the oldest known lunar map was by Leonardo da Vinci, which was created around 1505.
